Title: The rhyme and reason of country life or, selections from fields old and new

Author: Susan Fenimore Cooper

Release date: October 10, 2024 [eBook #74555]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: G. P. Putnam & Co

Credits: Richard Tonsing and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RHYME AND REASON OF COUNTRY LIFE ***


[Illustration: THE FOREST]




                         =The Rhyme and Reason=

                                   OF

                             COUNTRY LIFE.


[Illustration: THE BEE.      P. 52]

 With Illustrations from Drawings by C. E. DOPLER. Engraved by J. W. ORR.


                               =New York:=

                           G. P. PUTNAM & CO.,

                                  1855.




                                  THE
                           =Rhyme and Reason=
                                   OF
                             COUNTRY LIFE:
                          OR, SELECTIONS FROM
                         =Fields Old and New.=


                                   BY

                      THE AUTHOR OF “RURAL HOURS,”

                               ETC., ETC.

           ——“The boundless store
 Of charms which Nature to her votary yields!
 The warbling woodland, the resounding shore,
 The pomp of groves and garniture of fields—
 All that the genial ray of Morning gilds,
 And all that echoes to the song of Even.”
                                                              BEATTIE.

                               NEW YORK:

                       G. P. PUTNAM AND COMPANY,

                             10 PARK PLACE.

                                 1854.




       ENTERED, ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS, IN THE YEAR 1854, BY

                           G. P. PUTNAM & CO.,

 IN THE CLERK’S OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES FOR THE
                      SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK.

  NEW YORK STEREOTYPE ASSOCIATION,
        201 William Street.




                                   TO

                         WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.

                              =A TRIBUTE=

                                   OF

                       ADMIRATION FOR HIS GENIUS,

                                  AND

            =In Grateful Remembrance of a Generous Offering=

                                 TO THE

                         MEMORY OF HIS FRIEND,

                           =These Selections=

                    ARE VERY RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED

                                   BY

                                                             THE EDITOR.




                               =Preface.=


The selections contained in this volume are such as relate to one
subject only—that of country life. But this, in itself, is a very wide
sphere, and offers in its many different fields, old and new, all the
variety that the most capricious spirit could desire. In collecting the
different passages, the editor has allowed herself a wide sweep of the
net; it has been her aim to bring together many beautiful passages from
the best writers, mingled with others interesting rather from their
quaintness and oddity, or their antiquity. With this view, not only have
the poets of our own tongue, ancient and modern, English and American,
been laid under contribution for the reader’s amusement, but
translations from a dozen different languages have also been included in
the volume. Materials for a work of this nature abound, and the editor

would have gladly drawn even more largely from the sources open to her,
not only from the older authors, but from many writers of our own day
also. It was desirable, however, that the volume should not reach an
unwieldy size, as it was intended for pleasant companionship—the
summer-seat, under a shady tree, or the chimney corner in winter—rather
than for the prouder position allotted to the ponderous quarto on the
library shelf. A word of especial apology is perhaps needed, regarding
some of our omissions; “Comus,” the “Allegro and Penseroso,” Gray’s
“Elegy” and “Ode to Spring,” with other poems of that class, though
peculiarly fitted for a compilation of this kind, will not be found in
our table of Contents. But they have already been so often printed and
misprinted, quoted and misquoted!

                  “Dono infelice di bellezza, ond’ hai
                  Funesta dota d’ infiniti guai.”

In this instance their very absence will serve to recall them to the
reader’s memory.




                               CONTENTS.


           INTRODUCTION                               Page 13

                     I. =The Flower and the Leaf.=
           The Flower and the Leaf                         36

                             II. =The Bee.=
           To the Bees Page                                54
           On a Bee’s Nest                                 54
           The Bee                                         55
           Management of Bees                              55
           From Shakspeare                                 59
           The Drone                                       59
           Memory of the Bee                               60
           The Death of the Bee                            60
           Sonnet                                          61

                             III. =Spring.=
           The Return of Spring in Greece                  63
           Spring                                          64
           Description of Spring                           64
           Spring                                          65
           On Spring                                       65
           Sonnet on Spring                                66
           Spring, at Easter                               66
           The Airs of Spring                              69
           Return of Spring                                69
           Ode to Spring                                   70
           The Flower                                      71
           Ode                                             73
           To Spring                                       74
           To Spring                                       75
           Spring                                          76
           Ode                                             76
           The Awakening Year                              77
           Spring Scene                                    78
           Spring                                          79

                             IV. =Morning.=
           Morning Melodies                                80
           Morning Walk                                    81
           Hymn                                            81
           Morning                                         83
           Spring Morning in Italy                         84
           Up, Amaryllis!                                  85
           The Morning Walk                                86
           Danish Morning Song                             87
           Summer Morning Song                             88


                       V. =Lark and Nightingale.=
           The Note of the Nightingale                     92
           Sonnet                                          93
           The Nightingale                                 94
           Ode to a Nightingale                            95
           The Nightingale                                 97
           The Nightingale                                 98
           The Mother Bird                                 99
           The Mother Nightingale                          99
           The Nightingale                                100
           Nest of the Nightingale                        101
           The Nightingale                                103
           The Lark                                       103
           To the Skylark                                 104
           A Lark Singing in a Rainbow                    107
           The Skylark                                    107
           The Moors of Jutland                           108
           The Rising of the Lark                         108
           The Lark                                       109
           Lark                                           109
           Lines                                          110

                               VI. =May.=
           May Morning                                    112
           Emilia on May Day                              112
           Salutation of Maia                             113
           Song                                           114
           May                                            115
           Song                                           116
           May                                            117

                           VII. =The Flock.=
           On a Rural Image of Pan                        121
           Pastoral Scene from “The Arcadia”              121
           From the “Faithful Shepherdess”                122
           The Shepherd’s Life                            122
           The Shepherd’s Address to his Muse             123
           Phillida and Corydon                           125
           Shearing Time                                  126
           A Fayre and Happy Milk-Maid                    128
           Sheep Pastures                                 129
           The Spinner’s Song                             130
           Song for the Spinning-Wheel                    130
           Wurtha                                         131
           To Meadows                                     132
           French Song                                    132

                          VIII. =The Garland.=
           Flowers                                        136
           Spring-Flowers                                 136
           Arrangements of a Bouquet                      137
           Heart’s-Ease                                   138
           The Garland                                    139
           To Primroses                                   140
           To the Narcissus                               141
           The Rose                                       142
           Ancient Servian Song                           142
           To Blossoms                                    143
           Children’s Posies                              143
           Love’s Wreath                                  144
           To Daffodils                                   144
           The Lily                                       145
           Wild Flowers                                   145
           To the Sweet-Brier                             147
           The Wild Honeysuckle                           148
           Wild Flowers                                   148
           Beau and the Lily                              149
           Flowers                                        150
           Alpine Flowers                                 153
           To the Bramble Flower                          153
           The Painted Cup                                154
           The Wreath of Grasses                          155
           Divination                                     155
           Grass                                          155
           Daffodils                                      156

                             IX. =Medley.=
           Grongar Hill                                   157
           Letter on Certain Trees                        161
           A Sketch                                       162
           An English Peasant’s Cottage                   163
           Ruth                                           163
           Simple Pleasures                               164
           From “The Complete Angler”                     164
           The Milk-Maid’s Song                           166
           The Milk-Maid’s Mother’s Answer                167
           The Solitary Reaper                            168
           The Husbandman                                 169


                            X. =The Garden.=
           The Garden                                     171
           Of Gardens                                     171
           A Garden                                       172
           The Garden of Alcinous                         172
           The Garden of Eden                             173
           Of Gardens                                     174
           Gardening                                      175
           Flowers and Art                                176
           Chinese Gardening                              177
           Employment                                     177
           The Garden                                     178
           The Gardeners                                  179
           Lines                                          181

                             XI. =Summer.=
           Saxon Song of Summer                           182
           Lines                                          183
           The Summer Months                              183
           Virtue                                         184
           From the “Holy Dying”                          185
           Simile                                         185
           The Sun                                        186
           The Sun                                        187
           Delight in God                                 188
           Noon                                           189
           Summer Dream                                   191
           Summer                                         192
           Portuguese Canzonet                            193

                           XII. =The Forest.=
           From “Evangeline”                              194
           Song                                           194
           A Grove                                        195
           Of the Seminary, and of Transplanting          196
           Windsor Forest                                 196
           Fairlop                                        197
           An Old Oak                                     198
           Yardley Oak                                    198
           The Groaning Elm of Badesley                   200
           Yew-Trees                                      201
           Lines                                          202
           Lime-Trees                                     202
           The Birch-Tree                                 203
           The Hemlock-Tree                               204
           The Oak                                        205
           On an Ancient Oak                              205
           Wood Notes                                     205
           A Pine-Forest                                  207
           A Wood in Winter                               208
           “Leaves have their Time to Fall”               208
           Sonnet                                         209

                             XIII. =Birds.=
           Lines                                          211
           A Flight of Cranes                             211
           The Swallow and the Grasshopper                212
           The Same                                       212
           Song of the Swallow                            213
           Swallows                                       214
           Lines                                          214
           The Black Cock                                 215
           To the Mocking-Bird                            215
           The Bob-o-Linkum                               216
           The Owl                                        217
           Extract                                        218
           The Pattichap’s Nest                           219
           A Thought                                      219
           The Birds of Passage                           220
           The Dove                                       222
           The Dying Swan                                 223
           The Twa Corbies                                224
           The Redbreast in September                     224

                         XIV. =The Butterfly.=
           Muiopotmos; or, the Fate of the Butterflie     227
           On a Locust                                    238
           To the Cicada                                  238
           The Grasshopper                                239
           Insects                                        240
           Flowers and Insects                            240
           The Dragon-Fly                                 241
           To an Insect                                   242
           The Grasshopper                                243


                           XV. =The Streams.=
           The Streams                                    245
           The Thames                                     245
           River and Song                                 247
           Ode to Leven-Water                             247
           Song                                           248
           The Rivulet                                    250
           The Stream of the Rock                         250
           A River                                        252
           Life compared to a Stream                      252
           On the Bronze Image of a Frog                  253
           Little Streams                                 253
           Frogs                                          255
           The Rivulets                                   255
           Lines                                          256
           The Wayside Spring                             257
           Gulls                                          258
           The Fountain                                   258

                            XVI. =Fairies.=
           Elves                                          262
           Hynde Etin                                     262
           The Fairy Queen                                268
           Merry Pranks of Robin Good-Fellow              270
           Slavic                                         273
           Cottage Fairy                                  274
           Fairies in the Highlands                       275

                            XVII. =Medley.=
           Of Beauty                                      278
           Fragment                                       279
           The Memory of a Walk                           279
           A Bower                                        279
           Mist of the Mountain-Top                       282
           Emblem                                         283
           Song                                           284
           To a Mountain-Daisy                            285
           Mossgiel                                       286
           The Forest-Leaves in Autumn                    287
           Bohemian                                       287
           A Landscape and its Associations               288

                         XVIII. =The Calendar.=
           The Opening Year                               289
           On Observing a Blossom                         290
           February                                       290
           March                                          291
           April                                          292
           April                                          293
           Ode to First of April                          294
           April                                          296
           May                                            298
           June                                           299
           July                                           299
           August                                         300
           August                                         301
           September                                      302
           October                                        302
           November                                       303
           November                                       303
           November in England                            304
           Sonnet                                         305
           Song                                           305

                       XIX. =The Schoolmistress.=
           The Schoolmistress                             308
           The Hamlet                                     313
           The Nosegay                                    314
           The Well of St. Keyne                          315
           Losel’s Farm                                   316
           Gipsies                                        317
           A Sterile Field                                318
           The English Common                             319
           Lines                                          319
           Lines                                          320


                             XX. =Autumn.=
           To Autumn near her Departure                   323
           Autumn                                         323
           Ode to William Lyttleton, Esq                  325
           Song                                           327
           Autumn Scene in England                        328
           Indian Summer                                  329
           An Autumn Landscape                            329
           Autumn Woods                                   330

                             XXI. =Medley.=
           A Wish                                         333
           A Country Life                                 334
           Of Building                                    334
           Of Building                                    336
           The Wish                                       337
           A Thanksgiving for his House                   338
           The Stranger on the Sill                       339
           The Invitation                                 340
           Icelandic Lines                                341
           Domestic Peace                                 341

                           XXII. =The Hunt.=
           Ancient Hunting Song                           342
           Hounds                                         343
           Deer Leap                                      343
           The Hare                                       343
           A Hunter’s Matin                               347
           A Sportsman of Olden Time                      348
           Sonnet                                         349
           Sonnet                                         350
           Lines                                          350

                            XXIII. =Medley.=
           Ode                                            351
           Letter of Sir Thomas More to his Wife          353
           Peasant Pavo                                   354
           Country Life                                   356
           Scene in an American Forest                    357
           Song                                           359