Title: How to study "The best short stories"
        An analysis of Edward J. O'Brien's annual volumes of the best short stories of the year prepared for the use of writers and other students of the short-story

Author: Blanche Colton Williams

Release date: October 12, 2024 [eBook #74565]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: Small, Maynard & Company

Credits: Susan E. and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO STUDY "THE BEST SHORT STORIES" ***


Transcriber’s Notes

Words in italics are marked with _underscores_.

Words in small capitals are shown in UPPER CASE.

Please also see the note at the end of the book.




  HOW TO STUDY
  “THE BEST SHORT STORIES”




  How to Study
  “The Best Short Stories”

  AN ANALYSIS OF EDWARD J. O’BRIEN’S ANNUAL VOLUMES
  OF THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF THE YEAR
  PREPARED FOR THE USE OF WRITERS AND OTHER
  STUDENTS OF THE SHORT-STORY

  BY

  BLANCHE COLTON WILLIAMS

  Associate Professor of English, Hunter College of the City
  of New York; Instructor in Short-Story Writing,
  Columbia University (Extension Teaching and
  Summer Session). Author of “Gnomic
  Poetry in Anglo-Saxon,” “A Handbook
  on Story Writing,” etc.;
  Editor of “A Book of
  Short Stories.”

  [Illustration: Publisher’s Colophon]

  BOSTON
  SMALL, MAYNARD & COMPANY
  PUBLISHERS




  Copyright, 1919
  BY SMALL, MAYNARD & COMPANY
  (INCORPORATED)




PREFACE


In this foreword, I wish first of all to thank Captain Achmed Abdullah,
Gertrude Atherton, Edwina Stanton Babcock, Barry Benefield, Thomas
Beer, Katharine Holland Brown, Maxwell Struthers Burt, Francis Buzzell,
Donn Byrne of Oriel, Charles Caldwell Dobie, Theodore Dreiser, George
Gilbert, Susan Glaspell, Armistead C. Gordon, Fannie Hurst, Arthur
Johnson, Fanny Kemble Johnson, Burton Kline, Mary Lerner, Sinclair
Lewis, Jeannette Marks, Walter J. Muilenburg, Seumas O’Brien, Vincent
O’Sullivan, Albert DuVerney Pentz, Lawrence Perry, Mary Brecht Pulver,
Harrison Rhodes, Benjamin Rosenblatt, Fleta Campbell Springer, and
Julian Street. Each of these authors very kindly gave data which no one
could have gleaned; and in so doing they have contributed largely to
the usefulness of this study.[1]

[1] I must add to this list a former student, Pearl Doles Bell, who
interviewed Mrs. Irvin Cobb and who read her notes to my summer class
of 1916. (The interview was published, subsequently, in _The_ [New
York] _Sun_, October 1, 1916.) My assistant, Miss Shirley V. Long,
collaborated in the analysis of Miss Hurst’s “Get Ready the Wreaths.”

Only the other day a student demanded, “Why can’t I get an author to
tell me every step in the development of one of his stories?” Although,
as I tried to point out, such a thorough proceeding is neither
desirable nor easily possible,[2] yet the essentially valuable part of
the author’s progress may be most illuminative, and it is obtainable.
As one of these writers has said, the artist is not analytical
beforehand and is not so, of necessity, after completing his work. But
even from those who progress only, as they assert, by inspiration come
clear and helpful statements concerning their starting points and
developing processes. This generosity of successful writers augurs
well for the future of fiction.

[2] Poe seems to be the sole writer who has asserted that he could call
to mind the progressive steps of any of his compositions.

Charles Caldwell Dobie has said:[3] “Any man who has made a success
of his business or profession always seems to consider it his duty
to warn others off the field. The advice of both failure and success
appears to be embodied in one and the same word, ‘Don’t!’ This is a
curious paradox, and I shall not attempt to explain it. Perhaps it is
because the roads to success or to failure are hard to distinguish, the
sign-posts at the parting of the ways almost undecipherable. Yes, I
think it must be this realization of the nearness of defeat that makes
the successful one so anxious to dissuade others from the struggle. And
yet, after all, there is a bit of egotism back of the kindly advice we
offer, rather patronizingly, to our friends.

[3] _The Silhouette_, February, 1917.

“I would be the last person to warn the ambitious from literary
endeavor, providing they would rather write than do anything else
in the world; providing, also, they were equipped with three
qualifications. Determination is the first; a hide at once sensitive
and impervious ranks second; an hour--at least--a day to devote to the
pursuit of their purpose. I say _devote_ advisedly; the true lover is
never niggardly.... If added to these virtues, one has a quiet room and
no telephone, half the battle is won.”[4]

[4] Ellen Glasgow writes behind locked doors; Gertrude Atherton “rings
down an iron curtain” between herself and the world.

And, further, by way of emphasis on work and study, hear Burton Kline:
“As an editor I have a feeling that some of the writers who should be
railroad presidents or bank directors are getting in the way of real
writers that I ought to be discovering. In the long run it is probably
better to have all the writing we can get. The wider the net is spread,
the greater the chance of something precious in the haul. The teaching
of writing, even if it finds only a few real writers, helps to sharpen
the critical taste of the others and whet their appetite for better
writing. And I believe that sharper appetite and more discriminating
taste is beginning to be felt.... In the creation of a literature, an
audience is as necessary as the performers themselves. And the more
critical the audience, the more likely we are to have great performers.
The opportunity invites and develops them....”

Speaking from the critic’s and teacher’s point of view, I not only
believe that one can “learn to write”; I know, because more than once
I have watched growth and tended effort from failure to success. Many
would-be writers drop by the way; the telephone to pleasure is too
insistent, or the creative process is not sufficiently joyful. Some
students, however, need only an encouraging word and sympathetic
criticism. Harriet Welles is an example of this sort. Her stories have
been running in _Scribner’s_ for some months; she worked only a year
in my class at Columbia before producing finished narratives. Others
must labor and exercise patience in order to accomplish a few--perhaps
one or two--worthy specimens of the story-teller’s art. I refer, for
illustration, to another student, Elizabeth Stead Taber, whose “Scar”
attracted favorable comment and drew from Mr. O’Brien high praise
in his volume of 1917. Others write prolifically, turning out story
after story, before attaining the highest publications and prices--but
not of necessity before attaining excellent construction and style.
Marjorie Lewis Prentiss comes to mind as an earnest and careful writer
of this sort, who is improving as steadily as she writes and publishes
regularly. I need not refer to Frederick S. Greene--now in France--who
has become well known through his stories, and who felt that he worked
best under class criticism. He studied as he wrote, and his published
stories, with only two exceptions as I recall, were produced, first,
for the class-room audience. Even those who succeed only once, or who
never succeed, have learned to evaluate the content and the manner of
the printed narrative, and have added to the body of the intelligent
fiction-public.

The _great artist_, let me add, hews his own way. But--! Gutzon Borglum
once said that in his opinion there had lived only three great masters
of art: Phidias, Michel Angelo, and Auguste Rodin. If these are the
great names in sculpture and pictorial art, who are those in the world
of fiction writing?

... I use the form “short-story” to indicate the particular _genre_ or
type, to distinguish it from the story that is merely short. I have
laid down my definition in “A Handbook on Story Writing,”[5] a volume
which the student of this book should have at hand. In the space here
allowed, there can be no discussion of terminology. Mr. O’Brien has
expressed himself as uninterested in technical distinctions, a fact
which argues for the greater range of his choice. He has preferred
the larger values, and therefore no adverse comment is implied in my
classing a story in these collections as a novelette or another as
a story that is merely short.[6] From the standpoint of literature,
an advantage lies in the more extended field. And at best, opinions
differ. I can only set down my own reactions, backed by eight years of
teaching and a life-time interest in fiction.

[5] Dodd Mead & Company, 1917. Third Edition, 1918.

[6] In quoting, I have used “short story” or “short-story” as written
by the various authors. It will be seen that the forms are usually
interchangeable.

To the student, I would emphasize the fact that studying these
“Yearbook” stories, valuable as such study may become, will not make of
you a writer; but from them, this little book, and the wealth of detail
which Mr. O’Brien has accumulated, you can apprehend the elements of
technique and learn, at the same time, what is successful from an
editorial point of view. For every short-story writer must be both an
artist and a man of business. If his work is not published, it _is_
not. Much of it, early in the exercising stages, should die. But at the
last there must be evidence of labor and of genius. Only one evidence
is admissible: the product.

While you are learning, then, do not try to publish. “Do” your
exercises, and practise much; master the principles, and express
yourself. When you have become full-grown, put away childish things,
and forget that you ever heard of technique.

                                                BLANCHE COLTON WILLIAMS.

  New York City,
    November 30, 1918.




  CONTENTS

  STORIES IN THE YEARBOOKS

  1915, 1916, 1917, and 1918.


                                                                   PAGE

  A SIMPLE ACT OF PIETY. By Captain Achmed Abdullah           1918    1

  THE SACRIFICIAL ALTAR. By Gertrude Atherton                 1916    8

  THE EXCURSION. } By Edwina Stanton Babcock {                1917   12
  CRUELTIES.     }                           {                1918   14

  ONNIE. By Thomas Beer                                       1917   18

  MISS WILLETT. By Barry Benefield                            1916   21

  SUPERS. By Frederick Booth                                  1916   23

  BUSTER. By Katharine Holland Brown                          1918   24

  FOG. By Dana Burnet                                         1916   28

  THE WATER-HOLE. } By Maxwell Struthers Burt {               1915   31
  A CUP OF TEA.   }                           {               1917   33

  MA’S PRETTIES. } By Francis Buzzell {                       1916   37
  LONELY PLACES. }                    {                       1917   39

  THE WAKE. By Donn Byrne                                     1915   42

  THE GREAT AUK.     } By Irvin Cobb {                        1916   44
  BOYS WILL BE BOYS. }               {                        1917   48

  CHAUTONVILLE. By Will Levington Comfort                     1915   51

  LAUGHTER.        } By Charles Caldwell Dobie {              1917   52
  THE OPEN WINDOW. }                           {              1918   56

  THE LOST PHOEBE. By Theodore Dreiser                        1916   59

  LA DERNIÈRE MOBILISATION. By W. A. Dwiggins                 1915   61

  THE EMPEROR OF ELAM. By H. G. Dwight                        1917   62

  THE CITIZEN. By James Francis Dwyer                         1915   66

  THE GAY OLD DOG. By Edna Ferber                             1917   67

  BLIND VISION. By Mary Mitchell Freedley                     1918   71

  IMAGINATION. By Gordon Hall Gerould                         1918   73

  THE KNIGHT’S MOVE. By Katherine Fullerton Gerould           1917   75

  IN MAULMAIN FEVER-WARD. By George Gilbert                   1918   77

  A JURY OF HER PEERS. By Susan Glaspell                      1917   83

  THE SILENT INFARE. By Armistead C. Gordon                   1916   86

  THE CAT OF THE CANE-BRAKE. } By Frederick Stuart Greene }   1916   89
  THE BUNKER MOUSE.          }                            }   1917   92

  WHOSE DOG--? By Frances Gregg                               1915   95

  MAKING PORT.  } By Richard Matthews Hallett {               1916   96
  RAINBOW PETE. }                             {               1917   98

  LIFE. By Ben Hecht                                          1915  100

  THE FATHER’S HAND. By George Humphrey                       1918  101

  T. B.                  }                 {                  1915  103
  “ICE WATER, PL--!”     } By Fannie Hurst {                  1916  106
  GET READY THE WREATHS. }                 {                  1917  109

  MR. EBERDEEN’S HOUSE.    } By Arthur Johnson }              1915  112
  THE VISIT OF THE MASTER. }                   }              1918  116

  THE STRANGE-LOOKING MAN. By Fannie Kemble Johnson           1917  118

  VENGEANCE IS MINE. By Virgil Jordan                         1915  119

  THE CALLER IN THE NIGHT. } By Burton Kline {                1917  120
  IN THE OPEN CODE.        }                 {                1918  124

  LITTLE SELVES. By Mary Lerner                               1916  126

  THE WILLOW WALK. By Sinclair Lewis                          1918  129

  THE WEAVER WHO CLAD THE SUMMER. By Harris Merton Lyon       1915  136

  THE SUN CHASER. By Jeannette Marks                          1916  139

  THE STORY VINTON HEARD AT MALLORIE. By Katharine Prescott
   Moseley                                                    1918  143

  HEART OF YOUTH.         } By Walter J. Muilenburg {         1915  145
  AT THE END OF THE ROAD. }                         {         1916  147

  AT THE END OF THE PATH. By Newbold Noyes                    1915  149

  THE WHALE AND THE GRASSHOPPER. By Seumas O’Brien            1915  151

  IN BERLIN. By Mary Boyle O’Reilly                           1915  153

  THE INTERVAL. By Vincent O’Sullivan                         1917  154

  THE TOAST TO FORTY-FIVE. By William Dudley Pelley           1918  156

  THE BIG STRANGER ON DORCHESTER HEIGHTS. By
    Albert Du Verney Pentz                                    1916  159

  “A CERTAIN RICH MAN--.” By Lawrence Perry                   1917  161

  THE PATH OF GLORY. By Mary Brecht Pulver                    1917  165

  EXTRA MEN. By Harrison Rhodes                               1918  170

  THE WAITING YEARS. By Katharine Metcalf Roof                1915  172

  ZELIG.       } By Benjamin Rosenblatt {                     1915  174
  THE MENORAH. }                        {                     1916  176

  THE SURVIVORS. } By Elsie Singmaster }                      1915  178
  PENANCE.       }                     }                      1916  180

  FEET OF GOLD. By Arthur Gordon Smith                        1916  182

  SOLITAIRE. By Fleta Campbell Springer                       1918  184

  THE YELLOW CAT.         }                  {                1915  189
  DOWN ON THEIR KNEES.    } By Wilbur Daniel {                1917  192
  CHING, CHING, CHINAMAN. } Steele           {                1917  194
  THE DARK HOUR.          }                  {                1918  200

  THE BIRD OF SERBIA. By Julian Street                        1918  202

  THE BOUNTY JUMPER. } By Mary Synon {                        1915  207
  NONE SO BLIND.     }               {                        1917  210

  HALF-PAST TEN. By Alice L. Tildesley                        1916  212

  AT ISHAM’S. By Edward C. Venable                            1918  214

  DE VILMARTE’S LUCK. By Mary Heaton Vorse                    1918  216

  THE WHITE BATTALION. By Frances Gilchrist Wood              1918  219




GENERAL SUGGESTIONS


Read the story before taking up the exercises.

Consult the biographical data in the Yearbooks for 1916, 1917, and 1918.

Observe to what extent the various authors have reflected the country
or region in which they have lived. What conclusions do you draw?

Many of the stories conform to the laws of the “Greek Unities.” Name
them.

The following list is composed of the stories which are best for
_structural_ study.

  - “A Simple Act of Piety”
  - “The Sacrificial Altar”
  - “The Water-Hole”
  + “The Great Auk”
  - “Boys Will Be Boys”
  - “The Gay Old Dog”
  - “The Knight’s Move”
  - “In Maulmain Fever-Ward”
  + “A Jury of Her Peers”
  + “The Cat of the Cane-Brake”
  - “The Bunker Mouse”
  + “T. B.”
  + “‘Ice Water, Pl----!’”
  - “Get Ready the Wreaths”
  - “Mr. Eberdeen’s House”
  - “The Willow Walk”
  + “‘A Certain Rich Man--’”
  - “The Path of Glory”
  + “The Waiting Years”
  - “Solitaire”
  + “The Yellow Cat”
  - “Down on Their Knees”
  - “Ching, Ching, Chinaman”
  + “The Bounty Jumper”
  + “None So Blind”
  + “Half-Past Ten.”

The plus signs are prefixed to the titles of stories which present the
action in a closely circumscribed time and place. Study the stories to
which the minus sign is prefixed to see how the authors have managed
an extended period of time and place, or of either. On what phase of
the action has emphasis been placed? How has each author achieved unity
of effect? Notice the definite plot stages in these narratives marked
by excellence of structure. Although the technique of every writer may
differ from that of every other, yet in his story he will see to it,
consciously or unconsciously, that high points, “lights,” or climaxes
occur. It is a far call from the Roman _biga_ to the modern automobile;
but wheels, body and motor attachment characterize each as a vehicle.
From Poe to the present, the short-story vehicle has had, and will
continue to have, certain type features.

The titles should be studied for their attractiveness, originality,
suggestiveness and bearing on the story.

The title may be:

  a. The name of the chief character--“Onnie,” “Chautonville.”

  b. An epithet applied to the chief character--“The Great Auk,” “The
     Bunker Mouse.”

  c. A place--“Mr. Eberdeen’s House,” “The Water-Hole.”

  d. A suggestion of--1. An objective theme or idea--“The Excursion,”
     “The Wake.” 2. A subjective theme or idea--“The Sacrificial Altar,”
     “Boys will be Boys.”

  e. An allusion expressed fully, in part, or conveyed by
     implication--“Vengeance is Mine,” “The Path of Glory.”

One of the most difficult titles to create is that which has a veiled
suggestion, some bearing on the story that is clear or significant only
after the story has been read; e.g., “Get Ready the Wreaths,” “The
Interval.”

Group the stories according to dominant motives, observing with what
frequence certain universal motive-themes occur. For example, the
sacrifice motive is found in the following: “The Sacrificial Altar,”
“Onnie,” “The Emperor of Elam,” “The Gay Old Dog,” “The Knight’s Move,”
“The Bunker Mouse,” “Making Port,” “The Sun Chaser,” “Heart of Youth,”
“A Certain Rich Man,” “Zelig,” “The Menorah,” “The Bounty Jumper,”
“None So Blind.”

In each of the stories just named, what _feeling_ or power prompts the
sacrifice? What is the sacrifice? What is the effect of the sacrifice
on the one making it? On the one for whom it is made? On the reader? On
the final story-impression?

Study the following as the best examples of realism: “The Excursion,”
“Ma’s Pretties,” “Lonely Places,” “The Silent Infare,” “The Big
Stranger on Dorchester Heights.” What difference, structurally, do
you observe between these narratives and those developed by the more
“romantic” writer?

In every story try to find indications of the author’s theories about
fiction or Art in general. For instance, in “Feet of Gold”: “Naturally,
since all of us are artists, we seek the Truth through Beauty”; etc.
(p. 309).

Characters may be described by the author. This, the so-called
“direct” method, is not in reality so direct or vivid as the so-called
“indirect” method. By the latter a character reveals himself through
act, speech, gesture; he is also portrayed by what others say about
him, and by their reactions toward him.

What difference exists in spirit, mood and tempo between the stories
marked, respectively, by the direct and the indirect methods?

By how many stories are you attracted at the beginning? Does the
drawing power lie in character, suggested action, the picture of a
setting, the mood or atmosphere, in some bit of philosophy, or other
appeal?
