Title: "No place like home"

Author: Hesba Stretton

Release date: October 8, 2024 [eBook #74546]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "NO PLACE LIKE HOME" ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration]



                        "No Place Like Home"


                                 BY

                          HESBA STRETTON

                             AUTHOR OF

              "JESSICA'S FIRST PRAYER," "CAROLA," &c.



                              LONDON
                    THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
         56 PATERNOSTER ROW AND 65 ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD



                         BUTLER & TANNER
                   THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS
                       FROME, AND LONDON.



                            CONTENTS.

                         [Illustration]

CHAPTER

   I. AN OLD HOVEL

  II. IN THE WOODS

 III. SATURDAY AND SUNDAY

  IV. THE MAGISTRATES' MEETING

   V. TURNED ADRIFT

  VI. FIVE YEARS

 VII. HER LAST COMMAND

VIII. GOING HOME

  IX. A NEW HOME



                         [Illustration]

                      "NO PLACE LIKE HOME"

CHAPTER I.

AN OLD HOVEL.

THERE was not another home like it in all the parish of Broadmoor. It
was a half-ruined hut, with walls bulging outwards, and a ragged roof
of old thatch, overgrown with moss and yellow stonecrop. A rusty iron
pipe in one corner served as a chimney to the flat hearth, which was
the only fireplace within; and a very small lattice-window of greenish
glass, with a bull's-eye in each pane, let in but little of the summer
sunshine, and hardly a gleam of the winter's gloomy light. Only a few
yards off, the hut could not be distinguished from the ruins of an old
lime-kiln, near which it had been built to shelter the lime-burners
during their intervals of work.

There was but one room downstairs, with an earthen floor trodden hard
by the trampling of heavy feet, whilst under the thatch there was
a little loft, reached by a steep ladder and a square hole in the
ceiling, where the roof came down on each side to the rough flooring,
and nowhere was there height enough for even a short person to stand
upright.

The furniture was as rude and simple as the home itself. The good
household chattels, on which Ruth Medway had prided herself when she
lived in her pretty cottage in the village street, had never come to
this poor hovel. There was a broken chair or two, a table-top propped
upon an unbarked trunk of a young fir-tree from the woods behind the
lime-kiln, a little cracked crockery, two or three old boxes, and the
indispensable saucepan and kettle in which she did all her cooking.
Upstairs was a low pallet bedstead with a flock bed, and, on the floor
beside it, a mattress stuffed with chaff, close under the roof, where
the thatch must almost have touched the sleeper's face. There was no
window into this loft; the only light came through the square hole in
the floor.

"Home is home, be it never so homely;" and Ruth Medway had learned
to love the quiet place where her youngest and her dearest child had
been born. Behind the house lay the Lime-kiln Woods; once a busy place
of quarries and kilns, but left long ago to the growth of trees and
brushwood; the haunt of all kinds of wild woodland creatures, hollow
with rabbit-burrows, and thickly peopled with singing birds, and with
the game that the squire loved to preserve. Excepting in the shooting
season, when the sharp crack of guns was to be heard all day long,
there was no noise to drown the buzz of the humble-bee, and the low
whirring of the unseen grasshopper, and the hundred faint and delicate
sounds which fill the stillness of an unfrequented greenwood. Day and
night, summer and winter, had their special signs and sounds there, all
well-known to Ishmael, the youngest son of old Humphrey Medway.

He was the youngest son, and the most unwelcome to his father. Humphrey
had given but a scanty welcome to his first-born child, and each
successor had been received with growing surliness. Ishmael came the
last, when his mother's hair was already grey, and her back bent with
hard toil at out-door labour. The eldest son was grown up and married,
and the little love he might have once felt for his mother had hardened
into indifference, whilst the other children, those who were living,
were scattered abroad, seldom caring to return home. Humphrey never
mentioned any of them; but sometimes of an evening, when Ruth rested
for a little while, and sat watching the kettle boil on the crackling
fire of sticks, she would count their names over on her fingers; eight
names over which she sighed, but at the ninth her brown wrinkled face
wore a fleeting smile as she muttered, "Ishmael."

On the whole, Ruth was not given to brooding over the past; for she
lived too hard a life to keep her memory green. She had grown fond of
this lonely hut, where Ishmael had been born; and he had never known
any other home. There was nothing in it to prevent him keeping pet
dormice, and hedgehogs found in the hollows of the wood; though the
gamekeeper would not let him have a rabbit, or allow Ruth to keep a
cat; and a dog was not to be thought of. But a tame starling, and the
white owl which had chosen its roost under their thatch, and answered
his call in the dusk, swooping noiselessly through the air, made the
place full of life and interest to him. All the woods behind had been
his play-ground from his earliest childhood; and not the finest house
in Broadmoor could have tempted Ishmael to exchange his home for it.

Ruth had taught herself to read after she was married; when Humphrey
soon began to leave her alone in the evening, and kept her sitting up
late for his return from the village inn. Her loneliness had led her to
reading the Bibleâ€”the only book she possessed beside a Prayer-book and
an old collection of hymns. She had learned to believe quite simply,
with no doubt in her inmost heart, that "God so loved the world, that
He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should
not perish, but have everlasting life;" and that Jesus Christ had
really "given His life as a ransom" for her. With these two thoughts
firmly rooted in her mind she read the Bible eagerly; and it was from
its old well-worn pages she had chosen the name of her youngest and
dearest child, "Ishmael; because the Lord hath heard thy affliction."

Ruth had never been a woman of many words; and she was very silent
about those things which were deepest in her heart. Humphrey was
accustomed to boast himself of her subjection to him, as not daring to
"cheep" a word against him. In her young days she had been one of the
village choir; and now Ishmael sat in the singing gallery in her old
place. It was one of her greatest pleasures to creep just within the
church door, where her poor clothing would be least noticed, and listen
to the voices in the gallery overhead, and to join in singing "Glory be
to the Father" at the close of each familiar Psalm. There her bent back
seemed to ache less, and her wearied limbs felt rested.

Often in the week, as she picked stones or hoed thistles in the
fields, her withered lips would murmur the words, "Glory be to the
Father," and she would feel as a way-worn traveller feels in a hot and
desert country, when he comes across a little fountain of fresh water
springing up in his path. His journey is not over, but the living
waters give him strength to go on with it.

So bad a name did Humphrey and his eldest son bear in the parish,
as being idle and drunken vagabonds, that it overshadowed Ruth and
Ishmael, and they found themselves banished by it from all intercourse
with decent and friendly neighbours. Ishmael did not feel it until
he went to the village school, where the other children were warned
against Humphrey Medway's boy. The women who worked with Ruth in the
fields kept aloof from her; not so much because they were better off
than she was, but because she was so silent in her ways.

Thus there was no companionship for them but in each other; and it was
sufficient. It was enough for Ruth to think of her boy all day, and
to hear his regular healthful breathing beside her all night; and for
Ishmael, the woods that lay all around his home gave him never-ending
occupation and delight.

But though they were without friends, they were not without an enemy.
The nearness of the low hovel to the woods was enough to arouse the
suspicions of the squire's gamekeeper, even if he had had no reason to
dislike Humphrey Medway and his family. But, before Ishmael was born,
there had existed a bitter hatred between Nutkin, the gamekeeper, and
young Humphrey, Ishmael's eldest brother.

Humphrey had succeeded in winning away from Nutkin the girl he had
wished to make his wife; and though the keeper had himself married
shortly afterwards, he had never forgiven the offence, or ceased to
hold him and all belonging to him in bitter enmity. The very name of
Medway was hateful to his ears. Of late, too, Ishmael had won two or
three prizes at the village school over the head of his own boy, who
was about the same age, and who lamented loudly over his defeat by old
Humphrey's despised son.

Yet in spite of all Nutkin's efforts, he had been unable to dislodge
old Humphrey from the miserable hut. The rent of a shilling a week was
paid punctually by Ruth, who would rather have gone without food than
omit its regular settlement, since nothing else could keep her drunken
husband and herself from the parish workhouse. The farmer, who held a
lease of the lime-kiln and the hut, found her work on his farmstead
and showed her some little favour. So all the keeper could do was to
suspect and to watch, ready to take advantage of any trespass that
could be punished by the law.

For thirteen years now Ruth had worked upon the Willows Farm; and many
a hot summer day had Ishmael, when a baby, lain all day long under the
hedgerows, carefully swathed in an old shawl; while his mother toiled
in the harvest fields. He had himself begun to earn a few pence as soon
as he could scare crows from the springing corn, or could help to tend
the sheep in the chilly days of spring during the lambing season.

For the last two years his father had been grumbling at his being an
idle mouth to feed; though it was rarely Ruth saw a penny of his money,
and it had been with difficulty that she had been able to keep her
boy at school. But now the time was come when Ishmael must cease to
be a child, and must begin to get his own living by regular work. Mr.
Chipchase, the farmer, had consented to try him as waggoner's boy; and
had promised if he was a good and steady lad, to "make a man of him."

"Mother," said Ishmael, as they sat together on their door-sill in the
long, light June evening, listening to the cuckoo and the thrushes
singing in the woods, "I told teacher I'm going to service on Monday;
and she says I may take little Elsie into the woods to-morrow; and
she'll give us dinner to eat there; for me as well as her, mother;
because she says I've always been a good boy at school, and she's sorry
to lose me."

"I'm glad she's sorry to lose thee," said Ruth; "and if thee weren't to
sleep at home every night, I hardly know what I could do without thee,
Ishmael. I almost wish thee were a tiny little lad once again."

"When I'm a man," he answered eagerly, "you shan't ever go out working
in the fields, or tire yourself, mother. We'll never, never leave here,
because there's no place like it; but get the master to let me build a
better house that 'll keep you warm and dry, and we'll live together
till we die: won't we, mother?"

"Please God!" she said softly, with a smile on her brown face, as she
thought how much earlier she must die than the young lad, little more
than a child, who sat beside her.

"I should think it would please God," answered Ishmael, in a quiet
voice. "He doesn't want us to be always very poor, poorer than other
folks, mother?"

"Nay, I don't know," she replied; "His own Son was born in a stable,
and died upon the cross, with folks mocking at Him. I don't know what
thee and me have to go through, Ishmael. We can only say 'Please God!'"

It was late before Ishmael mounted the ladder to the close loft
overhead, and crept into his bed on the floor under the low thatch.
But it was after midnight when Ruth, with her wrinkled yet sinewy
arms, helped her drunken husband from one rung to another, fearful
every night lest her strength should fail her, and that he might fall,
crippled or lifeless, on the floor below.

"Thank God!" she always cried in the depth of her soul, when his
sluggish and leaden feet were safely planted on the floor above.



CHAPTER II.

IN THE WOODS.

THE village schoolmistress, Mrs. Cliff, knew Ruth well, for she had
employed her as her laundress from the time she had taken charge of
the school; and no linen could be sweeter and whiter than that which
Ruth washed, and dried in the sun on the gorse-bushes growing about
the old lime-kiln. Ishmael had been one of the most constant and
least troublesome of her scholars; and she was willing to mark her
approbation of him by entrusting her little girl to his care for a long
day in the Lime-kiln Woods.

The spring had come slowly on during May, and though it was already
June the trees were not yet in full leaf. The delicate network of
boughs overhead still kept many an open space for the sunshine to
stream through; and the half-transparent leaves glistened with a green
light. There was no thick tangle of burdock and thistle at present to
catch their feet and hinder them as they strolled along under the hazel
bushes. Here and there patches of bluebells covered the dusky earth;
and in a few rare spots, known to Ishmael, white lilies of the valley
were growing amid their broad green leaves. No very tall or massive
forest trees grew in the thin soil; but now and then an elm or an oak,
somewhat stunted, spread out its crooked branches; and there were
clumps of larches, tall and thin, growing in close companionship, with
their pointed tops piercing the sky.

And what a sky it was! A deeper blue than the bluebells under the
hazels, with little clouds scattered over it whiter than the lilies,
some of gleaming brightness, and others of a pearly grey, floating
lazily along before the soft fresh westerly wind. Ishmael felt a pride
in it all, as if the woods, and the flowers, and the sky belonged to
himself.

"Sit down and listen, Elsie," he said, throwing himself under an elm
tree, and holding his breath for very pleasure, as he strained his ear
to catch the different notes of the birds, singing in these early hours
of the sunny day.

There was the merry whistle of the starlingâ€”did Elsie hear that?â€”and
the deep, soft cooing of the wood-pigeons from their great clumsy
nests in the fir trees; and the harsh cry of the jay, as he flitted
across the open space between some trees, displaying his bright blue
wing-feathers. Oftener than any other note, except the chirp of the
sparrows, came the deep, grave caw of the rooks, as they sailed by
high in the air. Or was not the clear merry song of the thrushes and
blackbirds in the bushes all about them the most frequent sound of them
all?

But Ishmael knew also the note of the kingfisher and the woodpecker,
and the plaintive cry of the lapwing, and the call of the little
moor-lion in the swampy ground, overgrown with water weeds and tall
bulrushes. Every sound, loud and low, of the busy woodlands was known
to him; but they had never been so sweet to him as now, when, for the
first time, he had a companion gazing admiringly into his face as he
displayed his knowledge. Elsie was far before him in school; but here
she sat with wide-open wondering eyes, drinking in every word he spoke.

[Illustration]

"Oh, Ishmael!" she exclaimed, with a sigh of happiness and admiration,
"I should think nobody in the world knows as much as you!"

Never before had Ishmael had such words spoken to him, and he felt
almost dizzy. He began to think what other wonders he could show or
tell to her. Yes, there were more wonderful things to disclose to her
admiring eyes. The woods were beautiful; but he knew what was hidden
underground as well as what lay open to the eye of day. For underneath
their feet the earth was honeycombed with long, deserted galleries,
and roadways, and tunnels, where ages ago the limestone had been dug,
and brought to the surface by level shafts opening on the hill slopes.
Far away from the light of the sun, these subterranean paths ran in
many windings and twistings. Even on the surface there were indications
of them in basin-like hollows of varying depths and sizes, where the
treacherous ground had sunk in.

Some of these hollows were filled with water, forming little pools,
which glistened up to the sun, while others were dry basins green with
turf and coltsfoot, amongst which wild strawberries grew. Ishmael and
Elsie had busily gathered the small red fruit, and strung it upon long
bents of grass, to keep it as a dessert to the dinner they were going
to eat in the woods. Ishmael hastily formed a surprise for Elsie. When
the right minute came, when she was tired and hungry, and the sun beat
hotly upon them, he would take her to the cool shelter of a cave near
at hand, where he could show to her the entrance into the old limestone
quarry.

They came at length to a broad open glade, stretching far away between
two rows of trees, which was the famous spot for shooting-bouts in the
autumn, when the squire's visitors spent whole days in sport. Here in
the long, untrodden grass lay the old cartridge-cases thrown hastily
away last year. Ishmael told Elsie how the cracking of the guns rang
all day long, and how the smell of the gunpowder and its thick smoke
tainted the sweet air; and how, at night, when all was over, there
seemed a sorrowful silence in the wood, as if its timorous inhabitants
had been scared into utter terror.

"And the rabbits keep in their burrows," said Ishmael, "and don't come
out to play after sunset, like they do other nights, ay, by hundreds
and thousands, running after one another, and tumbling about like us
on the green, when we've a holiday; and you can see their little white
pads tossing about in the dusk. If you sit very still they'll come
a'most to your feet. And the bats fly about, and the cockchafers, and
big white owls, that make no noise when they fly. I'll show you our big
owl at home before you go home to-night."

They were sauntering along the glade slowly, when suddenly, from
under their very feet, as it seemed to Elsie, there sprang up, with a
loud whirr and a great fluttering of wings, a pheasant which had been
sitting close on her nest among the long grass, till their feet nearly
touched her. Elsie uttered a little scream of fright; but Ishmael went
down on his knees in a moment, parting the tangled grass which hid the
nest. There lay a cluster of brown eggs, ten of them, packed closely
together, and warm with the brooding-heat of the mother-hen.

"Oh!" cried Elsie, eagerly. "Can't we have some of them for dinner?
Only we can't cook them, you know, without a fire and a saucepan."

"Ay, but we can!" answered Ishmael, proud of doing what seemed
impossible to his companion. "We can make a fire, and roast 'em in the
ashes. We won't take more than four, two apiece; and I can tell which
are the newest laid. See, I've got a match in my pocket, and we'll pick
some sticks, and light a fire in a place I know of, where nobody can
ever find us."

Gathering up the sticks as they went along, he led Elsie to his cave.
It was situated about half-way down a steep slope which was overgrown
with hazel bushes and brambles. The low archway of the entrance was
little more than a yard high, and was quite concealed by the brushwood.
Within, the roof rose to a good height, and the floor of limestone was
dry, forming altogether a pleasant retreat, large enough to hold from
twenty to thirty persons. A green twilight reached them through the
closely-interwoven network of underwood; and a delicious coolness made
it the pleasantest place possible now the sun was so high in the blue
sky.

"Look, Elsie," said Ishmael, leading her to the back of the cave, where
a small hole, not unlike a large rabbit-burrow, led darkly into some
space beyond, "I've crawled through there many a time; and if it wasn't
for your frock, we'd go nowâ€”you and me. Oh, it goes for miles and miles
under the wood; and sometimes there's a little bit o' light coming
through cracks in the ground; and there are pools all black and still,
with just a tiny sparkle on them to show where they are; and there are
glistening stones hanging down from the roof, and drops o' water always
falling, falling from them. Oh, I wish you were a boy, and could creep
in along with me!"

"Oh, couldn't I?" cried Elsie.

"No, it 'ud never do,"' he said, decisively. "Never mind; I'll light
the fire now, and we'll have our dinner."

The fire was quickly kindled, and after it had died down a little, the
four eggs were covered over with hot embers, and left to roast. Ishmael
had brought a can of sparkling water from a little spring trickling
down the rock, whilst Elsie had laid out their dinner. Now she was
sitting beside it on a big stone, with her hands lying idly on her lap
in simple enjoyment, and her blue eyes gazing out happily on the waving
branches outside, whose shadows flickered up to her feet in a constant
dance.

"Oh, Ishmael," she cried, "I must say the song mother taught me about
'That's the way for Billy and me.' It seems as if it was made for us:
and I'll say them while the eggs are roasting.

   "Where the pools are bright and deep,
    Where the grey trout lies asleep,
    Up the river and over the lea,
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Where the blackbird sings the latest,
    Where the hawthorn blooms the sweetest,
    Where the nestlings chirp and flee,
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Where the mowers mow the cleanest,
    Where the hay lies thickest and greenest,
    There to trace the homeward bee,
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Where the hazel-bank is steepest,
    Where the shadow falls the deepest,
    Where the clustering nuts fall free.
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Why the boys should drive away
    Little maidens in their play,
    Or love to banter and fight so well
    That's a thing I never could tell.

   "But this I know, I love to play
    Through the meadow, among the hay,
    Up the water, and over the lea,
    That's the way for Billy and me." Â¹

   Â¹ This lovely little song is by James Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd,
and is not as well-known as it deserves to be.

But Elsie had scarcely finished the last line when she saw the branches
before her slowly parted, and a man's head bent down, and looking into
their cave. It was a brown, sunburnt, rugged face: she knew it well
enough, but she had never liked it, and at this moment it filled her
with vague terror. Ishmael was kneeling by the red and smouldering
fire, and touching the eggs with the tips of his fingers. So absorbed
was he that he did not notice the darkening of the green twilight as
the gamekeeper came stooping under the archway; and he laughed a low,
quiet laugh of delight as he took one of the eggs from its hot bed.

"That one's done, Elsie!" he exclaimed, gaily.

"What's done?" asked Nutkin's harsh voice close beside him. "I saw the
smoke from your fire, you young rascal, and I came to see what mischief
you're up to. What, pheasant's eggs! Pheasant's eggs! Would nothing
else serve you for your dinner?"

Ishmael knelt, unable to stir, and gazing up aghast into the
gamekeeper's angry, yet triumphant face. What could he say? There were
the eggs in the ashes between them; he could not even drop the one he
was holding in his outstretched hand. He felt as if he could neither
move nor speak. He had no right to those eggs; they were stolen; but he
had not thought of that when Elsie had uttered her childish wish.